Homer’s Odyssey influence in the Aeneid
    Beginning even so far back as Vergil’s own era, and continuing into the nineteenth century, there have been abundant critics of Vergil’s Aeneid, and serious questionings of its supposed genius. Many analysts in the past have concluded that the Aeneid, rather than the brilliant work of literature as we know it today, was simply an uninspired imitation of previous epics, namely, Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey. These critics held the wide beliefs that Vergil simply brought together past works from various sources, and sloppily combined them into a poem which lacked not only originality, but genuine emotion and liveliness. However, in the early nineteenth century, attitudes among classical scholars began to shift towards the sentiment that although the Aeneid certainly takes influence from Homer and other previous epics, it is far from a copy. Rather, careful study of Vergil’s techniques brought to light the true originality and emotion that are embedded in the Aeneid.
    Firstly, looking at the entire picture of the two work’s, the first half of the Aeneid does have striking correlations with the first half of the Odyssey. Both feature long Mediterranean voyages by the poems’ respective heroes, and for both Aeneas and Odysseus, the approximate midpoint of their poems corresponds with the conclusion of their wanderings. After this point in each story, however,  it is difficult to draw any more plot-level connections -- Odysseus has returned home, while Aeneas is left to explore unknown lands.
    Beginning the Aeneid, Book 1 is perhaps the most Homeric in nature. A plethora of parallels can be drawn between the events of Aeneid 1 to the events in the Odyssey, beginning at around its Book 5. The story sets of with Aeneas just off the coast of Sicily, when Juno stirs up a storm. Odyssey 5 contains a scene where Odysseus, on a raft just off the coast of Phaeacia, encounters a similar storm stirred up by Poseidon. The similarity here is not only in event, but in language: during the storm, Homer describes how “the East Wind and the South Wind dashed
 together, and the West and North, rolling a mighty wave...”. In a similar fashion, the Aeneid states how “together the East wind and the South wind and the Southwest wind… roll vast waves to the shores.” In the midst of these waves, each hero proclaims how their comrades who died during the sack of Troy were “three and four-times blessed”. Once he lands on Sicily, Aeneas’s second monologue in the epic again has similar language to the Odyssey: “Oh Companions, for indeed we are not ignorant of prior evils...” can be directly compared to Odysseus’s “Dear friends, surely we are not unlearned in evils...” The speeches that follow continue to have close parallels in both language and material, showing that Vergil has clearly based this section off of the Odyssey. Aeneid 1 continues in a similar manner: Jupiter sends Mercury to Carthage, and Zeus sends Hermes to Calypso’s island. Aeneas meets his mother Venus, in disguise, near Libya -- in Odyssey 7, Athena disguises herself as a pitcher-bearer and speaks to her son Odysseus. Each hero is subsequently hidden in a cloud by their divine mothers, so nobody will be able to recognize them. Aeneas stands above Carthage, in admiration; Odysseus does the same while looking onto Phaeacia. Finally, both Aeneas and Odysseus are asked to recount the tale of their voyage, by Dido and Alcinous respectively.
    However, Aeneid 1 does have some uniquely Vergilian elements. The most striking example of this is Jupiter’s lengthy soliloquy about Roman greatness and Aeneas’s destiny, a section which no doubt was added by Vergil for its nationalistic effect.
    The next book which has close ties to the Odyssey is Aeneid 3, although it is far less related than it seems on the surface. Aeneid 3 contains the recounting of Aeneas’s journey through the Mediterranean; one might initially suspect that it would have close ties to Odysseus’s tale of his trek home. Contrariwise, while the Odyssey’s version is characterized by fantasy, mythology, and the supernatural, Aeneas’s tale is more focussed on the “real” mediterranean, and prophecy of the future glory of Rome. Part of the reason for this may be that in Vergil’s time, the Mediterranean had been thoroughly explored, whereas in Homer’s it was still a place of mystery. The most Homeric scene in Book 3 is when Aeneas is driven to the Strophades islands, and encounters the Harpies. During this sequence, Vergil explores the mythological world that is ever-present throughout Odysseus’s voyage -- Further, the Harpies scene contains many parallels to the slaughter of the Sun-God’s cattle in Odyssey 12. The rest of Aeneid 3, however, presents a contrast to the Odyssey, in that it largely exists in real-world places and explores accurate geography. Also, a myriad of prophetic scenes are scattered throughout: on Thrace with Polydorus, the Oracle at Delos, and a vision on Crete. The book ends, though, again in an Odyssean-style universe, when Aeneas’s crew encounters Scylla and Charybdis, just as Odysseus does, and they listen to Achaemenides’ tale of Polyphemus the Cyclops. Overall, compared to Book 1, Book 3 exhibits far less of a Homeric influence. Although it does have scattered scenes which hold strong connections to the Odyssey, for the most part, Vergil’s and Homer’s intentions are completely different: Homer’s story was intended to fully feature adventure and fantasy, while Vergil’s goal was to provide a narrative that emphasized Roman glory and Augustan values.
    After Book 3, influence from the Odyssey seems to wane even further. Despite the Aeneid’s beginnings with a multitude of strong similarities to Homer’s works,  as the epic progresses, Aeneas separates himself from Odysseus. Although he possesses some of the qualities of Odysseus, such as persistence and valor, unlike Odysseus, he is also calm and collected, like the Romans’ view of an ideal leader. Through Aeneas, Vergil attempts to bridge the gap between classically heroic and Augustan values. The “epic hero” side of Aeneas is featured in the first few books, and in these sections, Vergil takes strong influence from the Odyssey, but as Aeneas develops into a responsible, pious, and patriotic leader, Homer’s influence fades.
Works Cited
Heinze, Richard. Virgil's Epic Technique. University of California Press, 1993.
Williams, R. D. “Virgil and the ‘Odyssey.’” Phoenix, vol. 17, no. 4, 1963, pp. 266–274. JSTOR,
JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/1086379.

